---
hip: 1127
title: Transaction Cleanup
author: Michael Heinrichs <@netopyr>, Michael Tinker <@tinker-michaelj>
working-group: Richard Bair <@rbair>, Jasper Potts <@jasperpotts>
requested-by: Richard Bair <@rbair>
type: Standards Track
category: Service
needs-hiero-review: Yes
needs-hedera-approval: Yes
status: Last Call
last-call-date-time: 2025-07-16T07:00:00Z
created: 2025-02-17
updated: 2025-07-02
requires: 1056
discussion-to: https://github.com/hiero-ledger/hiero-improvement-proposals/pull/1127
---

## Abstract
The `Transaction` protobuf message in the legacy record stream supports two ways to represent a transaction.
1. The `Transaction.signedTransactionBytes` field.
2. _Deprecated_ The `Transaction.bodyBytes` and `Transaction.sigMap` fields combination.

The definition of the **transaction hash** differs between the two representations. For (1), the transaction
hash is the SHA-384 hash of the raw bytes in the `signedTransactionBytes` field. But for (2), the transaction
hash is the SHA-384 hash of the protobuf serialization of the entire `Transaction` message; where this
serialization must be done using ascending protobuf field order.

This HIP defines a single transaction representation for the [block stream](https://hips.hedera.com/hip/hip-1056)
and preserves existing hash-based look-ups, so no client code changes are required.

This HIP does _not_ propose any changes to the Hiero API (HAPI) or to the existing record stream. The
consensus node will do all needed conversions from and to legacy `Transaction` messages for the foreseeable
future.

## Motivation
Unnecessary nesting in the `Transaction` message bloats the block stream and increases the serialization
work done by consumers. The `SignedTransaction` message is a better, cleaner candidate for representing
transactions in the block stream. This message is,

```protobuf
message SignedTransaction {
    /**
     * A byte array containing a serialized `TransactionBody`.
     * <p>
     * This content is what the signatures in `sigMap` MUST sign.
     */
    bytes bodyBytes = 1;

    /**
     * A set of cryptographic signatures.
     * <p>
     * This set MUST contain all signatures required to authenticate
     * and authorize the transaction.<br/>
     * This set MAY contain additional signatures.
     */
    SignatureMap sigMap = 2;
}
```

## Rationale
We _could_ specify the block stream's representation with a `TransactionBody body` field instead of the
serialized `bodyBytes`. But we feel it is important to make the block stream definition explicitly encode
the signed bytes, as this is such a fundamental part of the protocol.

We could also extend HAPI to let clients submit `SignedTransaction`s instead of `Transaction`s.
This would be nice, but does not offer a compelling return on investment at the current stage of the project.

## User stories
1. As a transaction sender, I want to be able to send transactions using both `Transaction` representations
so that I am not forced to rewrite the calling code (which may be impossible).
2. As a record stream/block stream consumer, I want a simple way to parse transactions and extract data.
3. As a transaction signer, I want to be sure that my signatures can always be validated, even if
transactions are modified to follow the normalized format.
4. As a user of APIs that take transaction hashes as input, I want block stream consumers to preserve the
current transaction hash definitions for both `Transaction` representations.

## Specification
The protobuf definition of the `Transaction` object will not change. The `SignedTransaction` message will
get one new field, a boolean that is true iff the transaction was originally submitted using the deprecated
`bodyBytes` and `sigMap` combination,

```protobuf
message SignedTransaction {
    ...
    /**
     * If false then the hash of this transaction is the SHA-384 hash of the
     * serialization of this SignedTransaction message as it arrived on the wire. 
     * <p>
     * If true then the hash of this transaction is the SHA-384 hash of the
     * ascending field order serialization of the Transaction whose `bodyBytes`
     * and sigMap fields are deserialized from the contents of this message. 
     */
    boolean use_legacy_transaction_hash_algorithm = 3;
}
```

### Modification of incoming transactions
When a node receives a `Transaction` using the `signedTransactionBytes` field, it will submit those
`signedTransactionBytes` contents directly into consensus gossip. 

When a node receives a `Transaction` using the `bodyBytes` and `sigMap` combination, it will repackage
those two fields inside a `SignedTransaction` along with `use_legacy_transaction_hash_algorithm=true`,
and submit the serialization of the repackaged message to consensus gossip.
 
### Changes in record stream and block stream
Nothing will change in the record stream. The `oneof item` in the block stream's `BlockItem` message 
will replace its `EventTransaction` choice with a `SignedTransaction` choice,
```protobuf
message BlockItem {
    ...
    oneof item {
        ...
        /**
         * A single logical transaction in the block stream.
         * <p>
         * If this item is not followed by a `state_changes` item
         * before the appearance of the next `signed_transaction`,
         * it MUST be taken as purely informational; that is, as a
         * "synthetic" transaction whose only purpose is to increase
         * the legibility of the block stream semantics to consumers
         * that do not themselves simulate consensus node logic.
         */
        proto.SignedTransaction signed_transaction = 4;
        ...
    }
}
```

## Backwards Compatibility
A user can always find the original serialized bytes of their submitted `Transaction` in the record
stream, even if they used the deprecated `bodyBytes` and `sigMap` combination. The block stream
will not preserve this property for deprecated submissions.

But it will still let a user find their deprecated transactions by `TransactionID` or hash in the 
stream. So this is only a minor inconvenience, not a fundamentally breaking change.

## Security Implications
This change has no known security implications.

## How to Teach This
The block stream standardizes to a single transaction representation, the `SignedTransaction`.
Users that look up transactions by hash can continue to do this as they do today.

## Rejected Ideas
- Keep `EventTransaction` in the block stream. (The parsing and wrapper overhead was deemed excessive.)
- Use any of the other fields as the standard format.
- Introduce a new transaction type.

## Copyright/license
This document is licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 --
see [LICENSE](../LICENSE) or (https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0)
